.TH FSCK.BOOKMARKFS 1 "Dec 01, 2024" 0.1.0 "BookmarkFS User Manual"
.
.SH NAME
fsck.bookmarkfs - check and repair a BookmarkFS filesystem
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B fsck.bookmarkfs
.RI [ options ]
.I pathname
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B fsck.bookmarkfs
program checks and optionally repairs a BookmarkFS filesystem.
.PP
Unlike fsck for on-disk filesystems (e.g., ext4), this program
does not check for data integrity of the bookmark storage.
Instead, it checks for bookmark names that are not valid as filename
(e.g., contains slash characters).
.PP
See the full user manual for details.
.SS Online mode
In online mode, fsck is performed on a mounted BookmarkFS filesystem.
.PP
The
.I pathname
argument refers to the directory to operate on.
.SS Offline mode
In offline mode, fsck is performed directly on the bookmark storage
via the corresponding backend.
.PP
The
.I pathname
argument is the path to the bookmark storage, equivalent to the
.I src
argument for
.BR mount.bookmarkfs (1).
.PP
Alternatively,
.I pathname
could be a colon-separated string
.RI \[dq] src : dir \[dq],
where
.I dir
refers to the directory to operate on,
relative to the root directory of the subsystem.
.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-o backend=\fIname\fR
The backend used by the filesystem.
.IP
If this option is not provided, or
.I name
is empty, performs online fsck.
.TP
\fB\-o @\fIkey\fR[\fB=\fIvalue\fR]
A backend-specific option.
This option can be provided multiple times.
.TP
\fB\-o handler=\fIname\fR
The handler for resolving errors found during fsck.
.IP
If this option is not provided, or
.I name
is empty, a built-in handler will be used.
.TP
\fB\-o %\fIkey\fR[\fB=\fIvalue\fR]
A handler-specific option.
This option can be provided multiple times.
.TP
.B "\-o repair"
Attempt to repair errors found during fsck.
.TP
\fB\-o rl_app=\fIname\fR
Readline application name in interactive mode.
Defaults to "fsck.bookmarkfs".
.TP
.BR "\-o type=bookmark" | tag | keyword
Subsystem type.
Defaults to "bookmark".
.IP
This option is ignored when performing online fsck.
.TP
.B \-i
Enable interactive mode.
.TP
.B \-R
Perform fsck on subdirectories recursively.
.IP
This option is ignored when performing fsck on tags or keywords.
.TP
.B "\-o no_sandbox"
Do not enable sandboxing features.
.TP
.B "\-o no_landlock"
Do not use
.BR landlock (7)
for sandboxing.
This option is ignored on non-Linux platforms.
.TP
.B \-h
Print help text, and then exit.
.TP
.B \-V
Print version and feature information, and then exit.
.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
0
The fsck operation is completed successfully.
.TP
1
An error occurred.
.
.SH NOTES
.SS Backends
See the NOTES section in
.BR mount.bookmarkfs (1)
for details.
.SS Handlers
A BookmarkFS fsck handler provides a way to deal with errors found during fsck.
In addition to the default built-in handler, there is also a "tcl" handler,
which allows handling fsck errors with Tcl scripting.
.PP
Like backends, fsck handlers can also be implemented as loadable modules.
See the full user manual for details.
.SS Availability on FreeBSD
Online fsck requires that the FUSE client supports
.BR ioctl (2),
which is currently not available on stable releases of FreeBSD.
See the NOTES section in
.BR bookmarkctl (1)
for details.
.PP
Offline fsck does not have this limitation.
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR mount.bookmarkfs (1),
.BR landlock (7),
.BR tcl (n)
.PP
The full BookmarkFS User Manual is maintained as a Texinfo document.
To read it locally, run:
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
.B info bookmarkfs
.EE
.in
.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (C) 2024  CismonX <admin@cismon.net>
.PP
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3
or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation;
with no Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.
.PP
You should have received a copy of the license along with this document.
If not, see <https://www.gnu.org/licenses/fdl-1.3.html>.
