.TH MKFS.BOOKMARKFS 1 "Dec 01, 2024" 0.1.0 "BookmarkFS User Manual"
.
.SH NAME
mkfs.bookmarkfs - create a BookmarkFS filesystem
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B mkfs.bookmarkfs
.RI [ options ]
.I pathname
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B mkfs.bookmarkfs
program creates a BookmarkFS filesystem on the file specified by
.IR pathname .
.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI "\-o backend=" name
The backend used for creating the filesystem.
This option is mandatory.
.TP
\fB\-o @\fIkey\fR[\fB=\fIvalue\fR]
A backend-specific option.
This option can be provided multiple times.
.TP
.B \-o force
Overwrite existing files when creating the filesystem.
.TP
.B \-h
Print help text, and then exit.
.TP
.B \-V
Print version and feature information, and then exit.
.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
0
The filesystem is created successfully.
.TP
1
An error occurred.
.
.SH NOTES
.SS Backends
See the NOTES section in
.BR mount.bookmarkfs (1)
for details.
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR mount.bookmarkfs (1)
.PP
The full BookmarkFS User Manual is maintained as a Texinfo document.
To read it locally, run:
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
.B info bookmarkfs
.EE
.in
.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (C) 2024  CismonX <admin@cismon.net>
.PP
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3
or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation;
with no Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.
.PP
You should have received a copy of the license along with this document.
If not, see
.UR https://www.gnu.org/licenses/fdl-1.3.html
.UE .
