.TH MOUNT.BOOKMARKFS 1 "Dec 01, 2024" 0.1.0 "BookmarkFS User Manual"
.
.SH NAME
mount.bookmarkfs - mount a BookmarkFS filesystem
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B mount.bookmarkfs
.RI [ options ]
.I src
.I target
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B mount.bookmarkfs
program mounts a BookmarkFS filesystem to the location specified by
.IR target .
.PP
The
.I src
argument is presumably the pathname of a file that stores bookmark data.
Its exact interpretation is backend-defined.
.PP
To unmount a BookmarkFS filesystem, use
.BR fusermount3 (1)
or
.BR umount (8)
on
.IR target .
.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-o backend=\fIname\fR
The backend used by the filesystem.
This option is mandatory.
.TP
\fB\-o @\fIkey\fR[\fB=\fIvalue\fR]
A backend-specific option.
This option can be provided multiple times.
.TP
\fB\-o accmode=\fImode\fR
File access mode.
Defaults to 0700.
.IP
This option applies to both directories and regular files.
Execution bits on regular files are masked off.
.TP
.B \-o ctime
Maintain last status change time instead of last modification time.
.IP
See the full user manual for the rationale behind this option.
.TP
.B \-o eol
Add a newline (ASCII LF character) to the end of each file.
.TP
\fB\-o file_max=\fIbytes\fR
Max file size limit.
Defaults to 32768.
.TP
.B \-o no_sandbox
Do not enable sandboxing features.
.TP
.B \-o no_landlock
Do not use
.BR landlock (7)
for sandboxing.
This option is ignored on non-Linux platforms.
.TP
.B \-F
Stay in the foreground, do not daemonize.
.TP
.B \-h
Print help text, and then exit.
.TP
.B \-V
Print version and feature information, and then exit.
.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
0
The filesystem is mounted successfully.
.TP
1
An error occurred.
.PP
For the daemon process (or the main process if the
.B \-F
option is given):
.TP
0
The filesystem is unmounted.
.
.SH NOTES
.SS Backends
In BookmarkFS, each backend provides a way to manipulate a certain kind of
application bookmarks.
The currently supported backends are "firefox" and "chromium".
.PP
Backends are implemented as loadable modules, and communicate with "frontend"
prgrams using the BookmarkFS Backend API.
New backends can be added without having to change existing code of BookmarkFS.
.PP
See the full user manual for details regarding the existing backends,
and the specification of the BookmarkFS Backend API.
.SS Extra options
The options documented in this page is not a comprehensive list of all
available options.
Unrecognized options are passed to libfuse (and subsequently to the kernel,
if applicable) as-is.
.PP
See the manual page for
.BR mount.fuse3 (8)
for details.
.SS POSIX compatibility
BookmarkFS is partially compatible with the filesystem specifications
in POSIX.1.
See the full user manual for details.
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR fusermount (1),
.BR landlock (7),
.BR mount.fuse3 (8),
.BR umount (8)
.PP
The full BookmarkFS User Manual is maintained as a Texinfo document.
To read it locally, run:
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
.B info bookmarkfs
.EE
.in
.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (C) 2024  CismonX <admin@cismon.net>
.PP
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3
or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation;
with no Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.
.PP
You should have received a copy of the license along with this document.
If not, see
.UR https://www.gnu.org/licenses/fdl-1.3.html
.UE .
